feat(backup): make remote immutable (#6928)
vatesfr/xen-orchestra: @xen-orchestra/immutable-backups/doc.md

Reviewer: Create a `.USAGE.md`  containing the user documentation.

# Imutability

the goal is to make a remote that XO can write, but not modify during the immutability duration set on the remote. That way, it's not possible for XO to delete or encrypt any backup during this period. It protects your backup agains ransomware, at least as long as the attacker does not have a root access to the remote server.

We target `governance` type of immutability, **the local root account of the remote server will be able to lift immutability**.

We use the file system capabilities, they are tested on the protection process start.

It is compatible with encryption at rest made by XO.

## Prerequisites

> The commands must be run as root on the remote, or by a user with the `CAP_LINUX_IMMUTABLE` capability . On start, the protect process write into the remote `imutability.json` file its status and the immutability duration.

Reviewer 2: Typo
```suggestion
The commands must be run as root on the remote, or by a user with the `CAP_LINUX_IMMUTABLE` capability . On start, the protect process writes into the remote `imutability.json` file its status and the immutability duration.
```

the `chattr` and `lsattr` should be installed on the system

## Configuring

this package uses app-conf to store its config. The application name is `xo-immutable-backup`. A sample config file is provided in this package.

## Making a file immutable

when marking a file or a folder immutable, it create an alias file in the `<indexPath>/<DayOfFileCreation>/<sha256(fullpath)>`.

> indexPath is either defined in the config file, if not XDG_HOME is used, if not available it goes to `~/.local/share`

Reviewer 2: This sentence looks odd to me.
```suggestion
`indexPath` can be defined in the config file, otherwise `XDG_HOME` is used. If not available it goes to `~/.local/share`
```

> This index is used when lifting immutability of the remote, it will only look at the `<indexPath>/<DayOfFileCreation>/` folders old enough

Reviewer 2: Rephrasing
```suggestion
This index is used when lifting the immutability of the remote, it will only look at the old enough `<indexPath>/<DayOfFileCreation>/` folders.
```

## Real time protecting

> On start, the watcher will create the idnex if it does not exists.

Reviewer 2: Typo
```suggestion
On start, the watcher will create the index if it does not exists.
```

It will also do a checkup to ensure immutability could work on this remote and handle the easiest issues.

The watching process depends on the backup type, since we don't want to make temporary files and cache immutable.

It won't protect files during upload, only when the files have been completly written on disk. Real time, in this case, means "protecting critical files as soon as possible after they are uploaded"

This can be alleviated by :

> - Coupling immutability with encryption ensure the file is not modified

Reviewer 2: Typo
```suggestion
- Coupling immutability with encryption to ensure the file is not modified
```

- Making health check to ensure the data are exactly as the snapshot data

> List of files protected :

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
List of protected files :
```

  // pool backupq
  'xo-pool-metadata-backups/*/metadata.json',
  'xo-pool-metadata-backups/*/data',
  // vm backups , xo-vm-backups/<vmuuid>/
  'xo-vm-backups/*/*.json',
  'xo-vm-backups/*/*.xva',
  'xo-vm-backups/*/*.xva.checksum',
  // xo-vm-backups/<vmuuid>/vdis/<jobid>/<vdiUuid>
  'xo-vm-backups/*/vdis/*/*/*.vhd', // can be an alias or a vhd file
  // for vhd directory :
  'xo-vm-backups/*/vdis/*/*/data/*.vhd/bat',
  'xo-vm-backups/*/vdis/*/*/data/*.vhd/header',
  'xo-vm-backups/*/vdis/*/*/data/*.vhd/footer',
]
```

## Releasing protection on old enough files on a remote

the watcher will periodically check if some file must by unlocked

## Troubleshooting

### some files are still locked

add the `rebuildIndexOnStart` option to the config file

### make remote fully mutable again

- Update the immutability setting with a 0 duration
- launch the `liftProtection` cli.
- remove the `protectRemotes` service

### increasing the immutability duration

this will prolong immutable file, but won't protect files that are already out of immutability

### reducing the immutability duration

change the setting, and launch the `liftProtection` cli , or wait for next planed execution

> ### why my incremental backup are not marked as protected in XO ?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### why are my incremental backups not marked as protected in XO ?
```

For incremental backups to be marked as protected in XO, the entire chain must be under protection. To ensure at least 7 days of backups are protected, you need to set the immutability duration and retention at 14 days, the full backup interval at 7 days

> That means that if the last backup chain is cmplete ( 7 backup ) it is completly under protection, and if not, the precedent chain is also under protection. K are key backups, and d are delta

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That means that if the last backup chain is complete ( 7 backup ) it is completely under protection, and if not, the precedent chain is also under protection. K are key backups, and d are delta
```

# Imutability

> the goal is to make a remote that XO can write, but not modify during the immutability duration set on the remote. That way, it's not possible for XO to delete or crypt any backup during this period. It protects your backup agains ransomware, at least as long as the attacker does not have a root access to the remote server.

Reviewer 2: Did you mean "encrypt" instead of "crypt" ?

Reviewer 3: I concur, eg from Kaspersky website:
> The aim of crypto ransomware is to encrypt your important data

We target `governance` type of immutability, **the local root account of the remote server will be able to lift immutability**.

We use the file system capabilities, they are tested on the protection process start.

It is compatible with encryption at rest made by XO.

The `protect` and `lift` processes must be run as root on the remote. On start, the protect process write into the remote `metadata.json` file its status (last protection applied, last protection lifted)

## Configuring

> this package uses app-conf to store its config. The application name id `immutable-backup`

Reviewer: IMHO, the application name should contain `xo`, example: `xo-immutable-manager`

## Making a file immutable

> when marking a file or a folder immutable, it create an alias file in `.immutable/<hash of full path>.<file|dir>.<extension>` containing the path to the folder/file and make this file also immutable.

Reviewer: IMHO we should add a directory level to prevent issues when lots of entries: `hash[0]/hash[1]`.

It's pretty easy and can help if there are a lot of entries.

> when marking a file or a folder immutable, it create an alias file in `.immutable/<hash of full path>.<file|dir>.<extension>` containing the path to the folder/file and make this file also immutable.

Reviewer: The path format used for hashing must be properly documented: `/` vs `\`, relative vs absolute, leading or trailing slash, etc.

> when marking a file or a folder immutable, it create an alias file in `.immutable/<hash of full path>.<file|dir>.<extension>` containing the path to the folder/file and make this file also immutable.

Reviewer: I'm ill-at-ease with the fact that the content of these files will not be encrypted even if the rest of remote is.

What bothers me is the inconsistency.

Possible solutions:
- use symlinks instead
- put these files in a specific directory which will only contain unencrypted files.

Author: * symlinks can't be made immutable `chattr: Operation not supported while reading flags on source`
* I think we don't really need to have xo use the hidden index folder

this will prolong immutable file, but won't protect files that are already out of immutability

### reducing the immutability duration

change the setting, and launch the `lift` cli , or wait for next planed execution

### why my incremental backup are not marked as protected in XO ?

to protect an incremental backup, all the chain must be under protection . To ensure at least 7 days of backups are protected, you need to set the immutability duration and retention at 14 days, the full backup interval at 7 days

That means that if the last backup chain is cmplete ( 7 backup ) it is completly under protection, and if not, the precedent chain is also under protection. K are key backups, and d are delta

```
Kd Kdddddd Kdddddd K #  8 backups protected, 2 chains
K Kdddddd Kdddddd Kd #  9 backups protected, 2 chains
 Kdddddd Kdddddd Kdd # 10 backups protected, 2 chains
 Kddddd Kdddddd Kddd # 11 backups protected, 2 chains
 Kdddd Kdddddd Kdddd # 12 backups protected, 2 chains
 Kddd Kdddddd Kddddd # 13 backups protected, 2 chains
 Kdd Kdddddd Kdddddd #  7 backups protected, 1 chain since precedent full is now mutable
Kd Kdddddd Kdddddd K #  8 backups protected, 2 chains
```

> ### Why does the protect process don't to start

Reviewer 2: This sentence should probably be rephrased like : "Why doesn't the protect process start ?"
